Contemporary theories of consciousness often posit that it emerges due to the complex interactions of other cognitive processes or is an illusionary by-product. Joscha Bach flips this narrative and holds the view that consciousness is crucial for the formation of goal-driven behavior, many of which we observe as intelligent. The purpose of consciousness is one of a conductor in an orchestra, tuning various individual instruments such that the overall effect is aligned with the desired performance. More formally, Joscha posits that consciousness has the function of minimizing constraint violations in a dynamic model.

Joscha does not explicate the mechanisms by which such functioning gives rise to nor is necessary for the higher-order cognitive behavior we deem as intelligent. However, he sets up an ontology which places consciousness thus defined as the invariance. Self-organizing agents, he posits, are ubiquitous in the universe, motivating his view of Cyber Animism. Wherein the universe is fundamentally occupied by self-organizing agents (in different scales of time and space) in contest with each other.

The key takeaway from this model is one of consciousness FIRST, rather than consciousness FROM (other mechanistic systems). Joscha observes that there is a separation between the Self and World Model which contains a simulacra of the self (Joscha-Bach-human acting in the world). Furthermore, children first develops a third-person reference to themselves prior to ascribing that third-person model (of themselves in the world) as “I” - first-person reference[^1]. There seems to be something more basic than our cortical processing of sensory information, something which seeks to help make sense of our inner world (including our inner world model of external stimuli - Res Extensa). This something is that which Joscha ascribes to the label of ‘consciousness’ and ‘I’, a layer of abstraction above the embodied, social label “Joscha Bach”.

There are numerous interesting results from Joscha’s view. If this organizing force could also be traced in evolutionary development of brain anatomy and located earlier in the evolution of biological neural networks, then it broadens the degree to which non-human animals may be conscious. Furthermore, once defined as such, could we perhaps also identify such systems of organization within non-biological systems? This ontology is one which allows the inclusion of AGI implemented on silicon into the broad class of conscious agents. Lastly, if the idea of consciousness as an organizing principle (conductor) is true and forms prior to higher-order intelligent behavior, perhaps our efforts into AGI research should focus on shedding light on just what are the mechanisms by which consciousness is formed. Perhaps this is a smaller, more efficient neural subnet from which surrounding desired behaviors can ‘grow’ and develop in a more naturalistic setting (akin to human child development).

Joscha’s views on consciousness is a welcome alternative to slightly more mystical views based on emergence or illusions and perhaps paves the way towards a testable, mechanistic blueprint for AGI research.

[^1]: This is an interesting endeavor and one of the empirically answerable questions Joscha’s view raises is whether children do first develop the third-person notion of being prior to ascribing self-identity, or whether that is merely a statistical derivation from linguistic information available to the child at that point in their development. See the colab notebook for some preliminary investigations into this phenomenon.
