> Alice and Bob are driving along a road in the city. The sky was dark and visibility was poor. Flashes of lightning occasionally lit up the foreboding cityscape, painting sawtooth patterns along the road ahead. The staccato of raindrops on the windshield gradually turned into a lullaby. Suddenly, a few meters ahead, an irregular shadow stepped into view, jolting Alice into full alertness. On reflex, Alice spins the wheel around and narrowly avoids the shadow. The wheels skidded along the wet road and for a moment the car spins out of control, crashing headfirst into the sidewalk. Right behind Alice in another car, Bob continued on without pause and the irregular shadow dissipated into a mist of water as the car drove over a puddle. So sets the scene for our hypothetical parable.

# Introduction

*“Science gathers knowledge faster than Society gathers wisdom” – Isaac Asimov.*

Aphorisms catch on precisely because it abstracts a wealth of acute observations behind few words, exemplifying the voluminous content possible with comparatively limited tokens. Penned in the 1980s, with the menace of the Cold War hanging heavy in the air, technological advances threatened to mark an end to life as we knew it. The spectre of improperly wielded scientific advances throughout history has plagued humanity’s quest to better its conditions. Yesterday (arguably still), unrestrained forces of the atomic nucleus sought freedom through annihilation. Today, widespread employment of Artificial Intelligence models provide convenience through oppression.

To be clear, we have yet to succumb to the folly of entrusting AIs with too much today and have been actively fighting back as a community from researchers to policy makers against the non-judicious application of AI technology. It is worth highlighting a key step in this fight: NeurIPS, a prominent conference at the forefront of AI development, has introduced a necessary “Impact Statement” for all paper submissions stating the “broader impact of their work, including its ethical aspects and future societal consequences” [cite NeurIPS]. This article is a look behind the scenes of this fight to ensure the ethical application of AI technologies from the perspective of the Explainable AI (XAI) movement, and attempts to show how the battlelines are always hazier than we think.
